---
layout: single
title:  "What is the notion of ‘taking back control’?"
author: Me
---

# Is it just a soundbite?

The core of both the Government’s Brexit rhetoric and a lot of leaver’s beliefs is the notion of ‘Taking Back Control’. 

What does this really mean? I’ve personally asked Brexiteers and I am yet to get a straight answer on this. The most common answers include:

- Controlling our laws
- Controlling our borders
- Being able to make our own trade deals. 

Let’s break these down a little. Each one could, and should have its own article, but let’s summarise what these mean here:

Controlling our laws

The UK’s vote in the EU council of ministers is 13%. This is based on the UK’s population. This has fallen from a peak of around 17% as more countries have joined the EU and therefore diluted the vote share of all member states.

It is true that the UK does not have the power of veto on just any law, but, it is important to understand that:

- Any law requiring a unanimous vote can, of course be blocked by the UK alone
- Any other law can be blocked if a minimum of four countries representing at least 36% of the EU population (Given the UK has approximately 13% of the EU population means it has the ability to act as a blocker with just 3 other states in some cases)

The UK is on the ‘winning’ side of a vote about 90% of the time, so the ‘lack of control’ being referred to would be the 10% of laws passed where the UK does not vote in favour. However, what many would consider the most crucial areas of law like justice, taxation, the EU budget, and foreign affairs  are areas where the UK has a veto.

British law still exists, of course. If you were to commit a serious crime, you would be tried in a British court under British law and be sentenced according to British law by a British (not European) judge. British law is something we are free to continue to create as an EU member, and crucially, under the Treaty of Rome, the European Court of Justice does not have the ability to override national law where there is no conflict. What it in fact says is that a member state (i.e. the UK cannot create laws which override European Court of Justice law. The European Communities Act, passed In 1972, which is what those in favour of ’taking back control’ seem to most want to repeal is what gives EU law supremacy over UK law.

In any case, ask most Brexiteers which laws they do not like, or are opposed to, or have been negatively impacted by, and it is difficult to get an answer. Please use the comments section below to tell us.

In conclusion, ‘taking back control of our laws’ would mean being able to change the 10% that the UK voted against, most of which are on issues that most would not consider central to day-to-day life (As we can veto laws concerning budget, justice, etc). 

Controlling our borders

Put simply, there are measures in place that allow member states (Like the UK) to effectively control immigration, or require EU citizens who cannot sustain themselves to leave after 3 months. The UK has never actually chosen to implement this control. I won’t go into the detail of why in this post, but I will outline how it works:

Whilst it is true EU members have the right to live and work in any member state (Around 3M EU citizens live in the UK and around 1.1M UK citizens live in the EU), the European Parliament and Council Directive of 2004 allows any member state to deport any EU national after three months if they have not found a job or have the means to support themselves. 

 In addition it should be noted that around 50% of immigration into the UK is from outside the EU.

Britain has also not signed the Schengen Agreement, requiring all EU citizens to go through passport checks as if they were arriving from outside the EU (However, these are normally quicker than checks for individuals not holding an EEA/ EU member passport). If we exclude candidate countries, then along with Ireland, Britain is the only EU member to have not signed up to this agreement. 

This means we already have a high degree of control of our borders.

Making our own trade deals

Again, this could become a long article, so to keep it short, for now, I summarise.

The ability for the UK to even begin negotiating trade deals is not permitted under EU law until the UK leaves the EU (Currently scheduled for 29th March 2019). 

As things stand, all existing trade deals negotiated by the EU will lapse as soon as the UK leaves and we will be trading on WTO terms, assuming it can agree on a Schedule of Commitments with the WTO.

The UK consists of about 15% of the EU’s total GDP. The idea that the UK will be able to negotiate better trade deals than the ones it currently has is a fallacy. There are three core points around this:

- As a small part of the EU’s overall GDP, the UK has a much weaker hand to play in negotiations than the EU in any trade deal with any partner.
- The EU will negotiate with the UK on behalf of its remaining 27 members and has no incentive to give the UK a better deal than its members currently enjoy. In fact, a deal better than the current 0% tariffs on goods and services is difficult to beat!
- The UK has virtually no recent experience in trade negotiations given the EU has managed these centrally for many years now.
- Countries such as the USA and China are focussing on doing deals with trading blocs, not individual countries.
- Entering negotiations with a country like the USA for example is likely to result in a deal for agriculture as part of any conditions they impose. (In fact the term Agriculture-for-Services) has been used a lot by US trade envoys. This will likely be very damaging to the UK agriculture industry for a number of reasons, but namely because tariffs would be heavily reduced on food imports, making it difficult for UK farmers to compete who do not always enjoy the economies of scale and access to cheap labour (Particularly after Brexit where freedom of movement is curbed). In addition, the USA has very different laws to us (and the EU) around usage or hormones in meat production, animal welfare, washing chicken in Chlorine, and so on. The USA could essentially force our hand in taking their food in exchange for a deal around our critical and outsize Services sector. Does this feel like taking back control?

One final point: The notion that the UK can form trade deals with the poorest 50 countries in the world (Such as those in Africa, principally around food imports, which is part of Jacob Rees- Mogg’s core argument around reducing tariffs on food) is untrue as the EU already operates an ‘Anything But Arms’ trade agreement with these 50 countries, making all of their exports to the EU for anything other than arms 100% tariff-free.

We will look at all these topics in more detail in subsequent posts.